# Overriding Virtual Method Table at Runtime

*November 10^th, 2012 By Zeeshan Qazi*

**VMT**–**V**irtual **M**ethod **T**able is a construct that is used in C++ to support functionality such as inheritance by providing a table of virtual method pointers for each class that has virtual methods, so that such a table may be pointed to by an instance of a class. Each time a class is derived from another class a copy of the base class' virtual method table is made by the compiler at compile time for the derived class. Whenever any class that has virtual methods is initiated, the pointer to the virtual method table for that class is embedded inside the object. The exact location of the pointer to the virtual method table is ABI dependent and depends on the compiler used to compile the class. An instance of a class may have multiple pointers to virtual method tables, if the class was actually derived from multiple base classes.

The method of organizing the virtual method table and the section of the binary where such tables are embedded is entirely compiler dependent. Even the mangled name generated for a virtual method table may not necessarily follow an identical scheme across multiple compilers. Though none of these mangling schemes or object arrangement schemes are undocumented, but documentation for this stuff is hard to find in traditional sources of documentation for most compilers.

In a majority of cases where one is writing C++ programs or libraries, one does not really need to touch the virtual method tables directly nor the pointer to such a virtual method table directly. But there definitely are cases where one would need to resort to such a low level aspect of object oriented programming, such as when one has a library that provides you a factory design pattern generated instances of a class, which you do not have the source code for, and you would like to extend the class returned by the factory at runtime. In such a case it is quite possible that only feasible option left to the programmer would be to either point the virtual method table of the class instances returned by the factory to a derived class' virtual method table or to modify the virtual method table slots in the virtual method table of the class to point to new functions. The former is obviously a better and safer choice than the latter.

In our exercise today, we would be devising a method for a common cross platform compiler GNU C++ to change the virtual method table pointer in instances of classes that have virtual methods at runtime. This will involve some knowledge about the mangling scheme that GNU C++ uses to name the virtual method table for the object. Though mangled names for the classes may be obtained at runtime using the **`type_info`** reference returned by the **`typeid`** keyword, there is no guarantee that the name that is returned necessarily matches the name of the mangled virtual method table. We will be using the virtual method table mangling scheme in its simplest case for non-template classes with the following assumptions:

- We shall assume that virtual method tables for the classes have mangled identifier with prefix **`_ZTV`** followed by the length of the name of the class itself followed by the class name, such as **`_ZTV9BaseClass`**, **`_ZTV12DerivedClass`**.
- We shall assume that the virtual method tables have the GNU C++ based format consisting of a header consisting of a **`null`** pointer followed by the pointer to the **`typeinfo`**. This header is followed by the array of virtual method pointers.

As we seek to modify the virtual method table in an instance of an object to point to virtual method table of a class derived from the actual class of the object, we have to keep in mind that the virtual methods that will be invoked will still be invoked on the original class instance. Therefore, we are not allowed to have any instance variables introduced to the object in the derived class used for the purpose of providing overrides for the methods in the class of the object. But we still have access to all the protected methods and fields from the original class. We will later look into how we can use zero-length non-virtual structures to store *shadow data* that may be used by the methods that are part of the new class so that we may still have some ability to store data and have it associated with the original object.

Let us write a simple program that implements the virtual method table overrides at runtime based on the assumption that there is only single inheritance and that the pointer to the virtual method table is stored only at offset 0 of the original object.

[   Download](javascript:DoLink('/download-sourcecode.php?Example=vmt-override-ex1');)
   Compilation Instructions:  g++ vmt-override-ex1.cpp -o vmt-override-ex1

*Refer to the source file `vmt-override-ex1.hpp` in this directory.*

If you look above you can clearly see that we have the statement `((newT*)oldT)-&gt;~newT()` conditioned to execute on an **`if`** statement that will never execute. This call to the destructor is only meant to cause the compiler to generate the Virtual Method Table for the unused class which carries the replacement Virtual Method Table. Without this statement the compiler would eliminate the Virtual Method Table, if the optimizations are turned on, causing our program not to function as expected. This is the same reason why we marked the methods in **`DerivedAgain`** class with the **`__attribute__((used))`**, so they get generated even though they are never used from the point of view of the compiler.

The code above has been tested on GNU C++ on Intel and ARM platforms, and works as expected. There are checks in the code above to prevent it from making changes to the Virtual Method Table pointer, if the code could not determine if the address of the Virtual Method Table indeed contains the Virtual Method Table in the expected format used by GNU C++  and also some IBM compilers. The code above may be made more portable by the readers to be able to do the same function for other compilers. Hopefully, the above tutorial has been enlightening to my readers.
